This is a Google Map of Manhattan, and
this right here is Broadway. It's a
notable street because in Midtown
Manhattan, it doesn't follow the grid,
but cuts across it and forms some of the
most iconic spaces in the city,
including Herald Square, home to Macy's,
and Times Square, home to creepy mascots
and way too many tourists. It's one of
the most famous streets in the world,
and it's disappearing. You can see that
Google Maps draws streets in gray lines.
North of 59th Street, like here at
Lincoln Center, it's a broad boulevard
slicing through the Upper West Side. But
at Columbus Circle, things change.
Broadway narrows down to a two-lane
one-way street. At 49th Street, it
shrinks to only a single lane. By Times
Square and 42nd Street, there are no
lanes at all. From Times Square down to
Lower Manhattan, it switches between a
single lane to none at all. Looking at
the overall Google Maps view, it almost
seems to disappear from the map
entirely. One of the greatest streets in
the world vanishing from the map. Of
course, Broadway isn't gone, not really.
It's just different. Instead of multiple
lanes of fast-moving traffic, you have
pedestrian spaces, outdoor seating, bike
lanes, plazas, and more. In fact, these
elements change from block to block
seemingly at random. I wanted to
understand this wicked cool
transformation of one of America's
greatest streets, so I walked from
Madison Square Park to Columbus Circle
in a freaking heatwave to see what
Broadway has become. Spoiler alert, it's
a lot better, but it's not perfect.
Let's figure out why after the bike
bell.
New York created a whole bunch of new
plazas when redesigning Broadway in the
areas where Broadway crosses major
avenues. Previously, they were
car-choked awkward intersections, and
getting through them was like herding
cats. But today, they are simpler for
drivers, and they create a new public
space in the Broadway right-of-way. This
is right near Madison Square Park where
Broadway crosses Fifth Avenue. You can
see that where there once were cars,
today there's cafe seating, umbrellas, a
little coffee stand, all protected by
some large rocks used as protection from
cars. This is straight out of the
tactical urbanism playbook. Tactical
urbanism is defined as low-cost
temporary urban design interventions to
create inviting human-scale public
spaces. If the interventions are
successful, they can be made permanent.
If not, they can just be removed, no
problem. There are some elements of
tactical urbanism that are pretty
standard these days.
A kit of parts that cities can deploy to
create more pedestrian-friendly public
spaces. These include obstacles like
these boulders to separate cars from
people. It can mean paint to liven up
the ground surface and again indicate
that this is a space for people and not
cars.
Movable furniture like cafe seating and
food trucks can liven up a space and
draw people in, particularly during
lunch in office-heavy locations like
Midtown Manhattan. Once proven
successful, these temporary materials
can be replaced with more permanent
solutions. Paint can become pavers,
boulders can become planters, and you
can build in some nice benches, too.
Times Square is the first space along
Broadway to be transformed in this way,
and you can see that it has the nicest,
most permanent materials. Now, there are
still some cars in this area of
Broadway, but only one lane with just a
few parking spaces. It feels like an
afterthought, especially when compared
to the traffic of Fifth Avenue. Once you
start heading north, car lanes disappear
entirely, and you're left with a street
that's mostly seating and a bike lane.
Honestly, I remember back in grad school
like 15 years ago, I dreamed of streets
where the main lanes would be bike lanes
with no cars, and this is basically it.
It's crazy to me that this is not on
some random slow street, but instead on
Broadway.
I'd like to put this transformation in
context, so let's take a brief history
moment to talk about how Broadway got to
this point in time. Broadway, more than
any other street in New York, is a
reflection of the city's history as it
has constantly changed to meet the needs
of each era.
The street started as a trail up the
island of Manhattan created by the
Weckquasgeek people who lived there
before Europeans built a settlement
there. It was a useful north-south
route, and the Dutch settlers used it
and widened it, making it one of the
most important roads from essentially
the founding of the colony. The Dutch
called it their high street or highway,
and when the English took over the
colony, they called it Broadway because,
well, it was really broad. As the city
grew and started moving up Manhattan, a
regular grid pattern was laid over the
island, but the existing streets were
allowed to remain irregular. Broadway
was the only major thoroughfare north of
the existing city that was allowed to
remain in defiance of the regular grid.
As I said, its intersection with major
north-south avenues created unique
spaces that became important landmarks
in the growing city like Times Square.
The rapid adoption of the automobile in
the early years of the 20th century
changed cities forever, and they also
changed Broadway. The part of Broadway
from Times Square to 72nd Street was
called Automobile Row, filled with car
showrooms, making it a major center for
the newly spreading car industry in the
United States. It makes sense, a big
wide street in the middle of the biggest
city in the US. Of course, it would be a
place for cars, right? We haven't called
Broadway Automobile Row for decades now,
and it's better known for a metonym for
the theater industry clustered along it,
particularly in the Times Square area.
But it was still a busy, noisy street
filled with cars for a long time. The
gradual process of pedestrianization, to
me, is symbolic of progress in our
cities. If Broadway, a street named for
how wide it is, and used to be called
Automobile Row, can now effectively be
evicting all cars from its busiest, most
culturally significant stretch, then
some real change must be happening out
there. It gives me some hope. The city
is pedestrianizing Broadway according to
its Broadway Vision Plan announced in
2021. It's an extension of the initial
efforts during the Bloomberg
administration to pedestrianize Times
Square, which turned out to be a
success. It proved that removing traffic
on a busy street could be viable when
all the conventional wisdom at the time
was saying that pedestrian malls were a
guaranteed flop destined to ruin
businesses along it.
Times Square today seems to be doing
just fine, and the rest of Broadway
seems to be doing pretty well, at least
based on my visit. Please don't judge
Broadway entirely based on my footage,
though. I know it looks like there
aren't that many people around. This was
during the East Coast heatwave in June,
and I took my walk at like 7:30 in the
morning to avoid the worst of the heat.
Some like it hot, but not this wimpy
Californian.
Now, the tactical urbanism continues as
you walk north toward Herald Square,
home to Macy's and the Thanksgiving Day
Parade. There are cars allowed for the
next few blocks. I'm not sure if that
was because there were a couple of
high-rent hotels along this stretch, and
it's nice for them to have taxi access.
I guess that's maybe my biggest critique
of the space, that there's a lot of
inconsistency in the configuration of
the spaces. Sometimes you don't have to
worry about cars, but sometimes you do.
Sometimes there's a bike lane, and
sometimes it's sharrows. Sometimes the
bike lane is directly in the middle of
the street, and sometimes it's not. I
get the feeling that the producers of
this space seemingly are redesigning
Broadway block by block without a lot of
consultation about what was happening in
the previous block. That actually brings
up kind of an interesting planning
philosophy conundrum. You have this
world-famous street. Do you treat it as
a single, unified entity, or as many
separate streets as it cuts through
neighborhoods? The unified entity model
is also basically the Paris Boulevard
model. When Haussmann cut those
boulevards through the city, he had the
authority to make the street completely
uniform, going so far as even tear down
the buildings along the street and
impose strict design standards on the
new buildings, creating a uniform
experience. The boulevards became a
distinct place separate from the
character of the neighborhoods around
them.
Or is it better for Broadway to morph
and change configuration based on
neighborhood needs and wants?
This ultimately makes Broadway a local
street more than one for moving through
or serving tourists. That's clearly what
New York chose.
I mean, the Haussmann model only really
works when you have a dictator
supporting your efforts, and you're cool
with displacing like a ton of people and
making them look as haggard as the cast
of Les Mis.
You can see here that the city worked
closely with neighborhood groups like
the Times Square Alliance, Garment
District Alliance, 34th Street
Partnership, Flatiron NoMad Partnership,
and the Union Square Partnership to
develop plans for their sections of
Broadway. You see the neighborhood
signage and branding along the way as
well. I think that's actually kind of a
cool feature for tourists walking along
Broadway who might not realize what
neighborhood they're in, or might not
know that there's even a Garment
District at all, for example.
This neighborhood model is how New York
does a lot of its public plaza projects
outside of the Broadway corridor as
well.
They require nonprofit or community
partners to actually operate and
maintain the public spaces. I think it's
kind of interesting that the biggest gap
in the neighborhood organizations on
this map corresponds to the section of
the corridor that looked most like a
normal street, and I guess there wasn't
a neighborhood organization there
willing to monitor any new cafes and
food trucks. As you move past Herald
Square and the Garment District, you
pretty quickly get swept up in the
hustle bustle Times Square. I actually
found myself wishing that Times Square
wasn't on the Broadway corridor at all,
which is kind of ironic given that it
was the first part of Broadway
pedestrianized and kind of provided the
template for everything else afterwards.
But when I lived in New York, me and
seemingly all other locals avoided Times
Square like the plague. It was just like
Mama Mia, too many tourists, too loud
and crazy. The pedestrianization gave
the tourists more room, which is great,
uh but it's still too much and too crazy
to navigate through easily, even if you
ain't misbehaving. It also breaks up the
continuous bike lanes along Broadway. I
totally understand that as adding bikes
to this mess would be terrible, but how
great would it be to bike continuously
on a wide, traffic-calmed street through
Manhattan? I actually didn't realize
that the bike lane didn't continue
through Times Square when I attempted to
rent a city bike and bike along the
corridor. I got diverted. I swear I was
halfway to Chicago before I got turned
back around.
Let's go back to our final segment here,
north of Times Square to Columbus
Circle.
In this area, we're back to the
inconsistent block-by-block design. They
painted one street block blue, then you
get more car traffic with a cycle track
and some wider pedestrian Vision Plan is
transformative, bringing much-needed
public space to the people of Midtown
Manhattan. It's infinitely better than
the car traffic in Automobile Row.
I appreciate the democratic approach to
planning block by block, though I would
have preferred some more consistency in
bike and pedestrian zone configurations,
and maybe some consistency in materials.
I think once the corridor continues to
evolve from tactical urbanism materials
to more permanent Times Square
materials, this will be ironed out. In
the meantime, Broadway feels very New
York City. Busy, loud, a lot going on at
once.
If you do what I did and take a walk
along Broadway, you'll see the evolution
of Manhattan itself, and I think it's
worth the trip.
One thing that made this Broadway
transformation so successful was the
congestion pricing program that began on
January 2025. It reduced the number of
private vehicles below 61st Street,
which led to less congestion, fewer
crashes, and a better environment for
pedestrians. City planners know this
because they have access to robust data,
often at the level of each intersection.
One amazing product that allows planners
to do this kind of analysis is TomTom
Move. TomTom Move gives city planners,
traffic authorities, and businesses,
municipal agencies, easy access to
detailed traffic analytics and mobility
data. And they can get that through
ready-to-use reports and data
visualizations.
There are a few different tools that
these folks can use. Traffic Stats
allows users to analyze, predict, and
improve traffic, identify congestion
bottlenecks and capacity on the roads
based on historical traffic data
reports.
Origin-destination analysis lets users
analyze trip patterns and identify
preferred routes.
TomTom Move also lets users monitor
real-time traffic on key routes.
That real-time info lets municipalities
take immediate action and optimize
traffic conditions.
Users can also get data at the level of
the intersection through the Junction
Analytics tool. It allows users to
monitor turn ratios, current delay, and
other valuable traffic information based
on real-time traffic data.
An added bonus is that planners can
export this data in a variety of
formats, including shapefile, JSON, and
Excel on demand, ensuring compatibility
with existing systems.
I personally found the tool like super
easy to use. It was easy to just dive in
and start getting interesting and actual
information right away.
If you're a planner who needs access to
comprehensive travel data in an
easy-to-use set of tools, you'll want to
try TomTom Move. If you click on the
link on screen or in the description,
you can register and get a free 30-day
trial to see if it meets your needs.
It's so easy to use, you won't even need
more than 1 day, but they give you 30.
So, go try TomTom Move today.